

===== PAGE 1 =====
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Flexible Services and Manufacturing Journal (2023) 35:241–268
       https://doi.org/10.1007/s10696-022-09467-6            
                                                             
                                                             
       A bi‑objective multi‑population biased random key genetic
       algorithm for joint scheduling quay cranes and speed  
       adjustable vehicles in container terminals            
                                                             
                                                             
       Dalila B. M. M. Fontes1,2 · S. Mahdi Homayouni1       
                                                             
       Accepted: 27 August 2022 / Published online: 14 September 2022
       © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature
       2022                                                  
                                                             
       Abstract                                              
       This work formulates a mixed-integer linear programming (MILP) model and pro-
       poses a bi-objective multi-population biased random key genetic algorithm (mp-
       BRKGA) for the joint scheduling of quay cranes and speed adjustable vehicles in
       container terminals considering the dual-cycling strategy. Under such a strategy,
       a combination of loading and unloading containers are handled by a set of cranes
       (moved between ships and vehicles) and transported by a set of vehicles (transported
       between the quayside and the storage area). The problem consists of four compo-
       nents: crane scheduling, vehicle assignment, vehicle scheduling, and speed assign-
       ment both for empty and loaded journey legs. The results show that an approximated
       true Pareto front can be found by solving the proposed MILP model and that the mp-
       BRKGA finds uniformly distributed Pareto fronts, close to the true ones. Addition-
       ally, the results clearly demonstrate the advantages of considering speed adjustable
       vehicles since both the makespan and the energy consumption can be considerably
       reduced.                                              
       Keywords Joint scheduling · Container terminal · Speed adjustable vehicles ·
       Quay cranes · Energy efficiency · Biased random key genetic algorithm · MILP ·
       Bi-objective                                          
                                                             
       Supported by ERDF - European Regional Development Fund, COMPETE 2020 - Operational
       Programme for Competitiveness and Internationalisation, and by National Fundsthrough FCT -
       Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia within projects POCI-01-0145-FEDER-031821-PTDC/
       EGE-OGE/31821/2017 and POCI-01-0145-FEDER-031447-PTDC/EEI-AUT/31447/2017.
       *                                                     
         S. Mahdi Homayouni                                  
         smh@inesctec.pt                                     
         Dalila B. M. M. Fontes                              
         fontes@fep.up.pt                                    
       1 LIAAD, INESC TEC, Porto, Portugal                   
       2 Faculdade de Economia, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal
                                             Vol.:(012134 536789)
                                                             

===== PAGE 2 =====
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       242                             D. B. M. M. Fontes, S. M. Homayouni
       1 Introduction                                        
                                                             
                                                             
       The introduction of containers facilitated standardization of maritime transporta-
       tion (ship loading and unloading and cargo transportation within and in and out
       of seaports), which in turn led to more efficient scheduling and controlling of
       seaport operations.                                   
         A typical container handling system consists of a set of quay cranes (QCs)
       located at the quayside, a set of yard cranes (YCs) located at the storage yard,
       and a set of horizontal transport vehicles (vehicles) that connect the quayside and
       the storage yard. Usually, QCs are allocated exclusively to a single ship that has
       several QCs allocated to it while vehicles are shared among several ships, that is,
       each ship is served by several vehicles and each vehicle serves several ships. The
       handling sequence starts when a container ship moors at a container terminal.
       Several QCs are assigned to unload the importing containers from the ship onto
       vehicles, one at a time. Then the vehicles transport the containers to one of the
       load/unload stations (LU stations) in the storage yard. The reverse process takes
       place when the vehicles transport the exporting containers from the LU stations
       to the quayside and then the QCs pick them up from the vehicles and load them
       into the ship.                                        
         Container terminals, at least modern ones (e.g., Euromax CT in Rotterdam and
       Pasir Panjang Terminal in Singapore), employ automated guided vehicles (AGVs)
       to transport containers between the quayside and the storage area since AGVs
       provide a higher degree of reliability while at the same time allow for labor cost
       savings (Schmidt et al. 2015; Ma et al. 2021). AGVs are usually classified as pas-
       sive vehicles as they are not able to lift the containers. Thus, an AGV arriving
       at the quayside is loaded or unloaded by a QC. Nevertheless, AGVs may have
       to wait at the quayside as a QC may not be readily available. On the other hand,
       QCs may have to wait for the arrival of an AGV (to the quayside) before picking
       up or dropping off a container. Hence, handling and transport tasks performed by
       the QCs and the AGVs, respectively, are tightly intertwined. Therefore, they have
       to be jointly optimized. Recent reviews on joint scheduling methods in container
       terminals can be found in (Homayouni and Fontes 2018; Kizilay et al. 2021).
         It is common practice to unload all importing containers first and then to load
       all exporting containers; such a strategy is known as the single-cycling strat-
       egy. As expected using a dual-cycling strategy, i.e., combining the loading and
       unloading processes, results in a more complex and harder to solve optimization
       problem. However, such a strategy can, potentially, increase the efficiency of the
       container terminal as a whole by reducing empty travel distances as well as idle
       times of both QCs and AGVs (Homayouni and Fontes 2021a; Homayouni et al.
       2014).                                                
         Although many factors influence the productivity and efficiency of ports, envi-
       ronmental awareness and stern regulation have significantly increased the impor-
       tance and relevance of sustainability issues. This work, following such a trend,
       considers not only the usual economic metric (makespan) but also an environ-
       mental metric (energy efficiency). Energy efficiency entails providing the same
       1 3                                                   

===== PAGE 3 =====
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       A bi‑objective multi‑population biased random key genetic… 243
                                                             
       level of service while consuming less energy, which in turn results in lower emis-
       sions; this way contributes to increasing port sustainability. Although several
       works have been reported on the simultaneous scheduling of QCs and AGVs,
       almost all optimize only time related measures (see, e.g.,Kizilay et al. 2021; Yue
       et al. 2021and the references therein).               
         In this work, energy efficiency is studied by analyzing trade-offs between the
       time required to conclude all handling and transporting tasks (makespan) and the
       total AGV energy consumption. Better coordination of QCs and AGVs may reduce
       the required idle times and lead to solutions in which both objectives are improved.
       Additionally, time and/or energy gains may be achieved by having the AGVs travel
       at different speeds. Time gains can be achieved by having the AGVs travel faster,
       while energy consumption may be reduced by having them travel slower. The AGVs
       considered can autonomously adjust their speed and, hence, can travel faster in some
       journeys or journey legs and slower in some others. Hereafter, we refer to this type
       of AGVs as speed adjustable AGVs (SA-AGVs).           
         Although, speed adjustable vehicles have already been considered in other con-
       texts, such as ship routing (Dulebenets et al. 2021; Yu et al. 2019) and manufac-
       turing systems (Homayouni and Fontes 2021b; Riazi et al. 2020), in this context
       (QCs and SA-AGVs scheduling) they have only been considered in (Homayouni
       and Fontes 2021a). Here, we extend the latter work by proposing a modified MILP
       model and also by proposing a bi-objective multi-population biased random key
       genetic algorithm (mp-BRKGA) capable of quickly finding solutions with good
       trade-offs regarding time (makespan) and energy (AGV energy consumption).
         The joint scheduling of QCs and SA-AGVs has four components: (i) QC sched-
       uling - timing the handling tasks of each QC, (ii) SA-AGV assignment - assigning
       transport tasks to SA-AGVs, (iii) SA-AGV scheduling - sequencing and timing the
       transport tasks of each SA-AGV, and (iv) speed assignment - determining the speed
       of each leg (loaded and empty) of each transport task. Additionally, we consider the
       dual-cycling strategy under which container loading and unloading are scheduled
       simultaneously. The main contributions of this work are several: first, we address
       a new problem that has only been previously addressed in (Homayouni and Fontes
       2021a). Second, we clearly show the positive impact of considering SA-AGVs in
       practice, since the computational results demonstrate that by resorting to SA-AGVs
       it is possible to load and unload ships faster and, at the same time, consume less
       energy. Third, we propose a bi-objective mixed-integer linear programming (MILP)
       model that improves on that of Homayouni and Fontes (2021a) since it now has
       fewer decision variables and fewer constraints. Thus, optimal Pareto fronts are
       obtained for more problem instances than those originally reported in (Homayouni
       and Fontes 2021a). Fourth, we develop a bi-objective multi-population Biased Ran-
       dom Key Genetic Algorithm (mp-BRKGA) that efficiently approximates the true
       Pareto front. Finally, the mp-BRKGA can be used to find solutions for large and
       realistic size instances efficiently.                 
         The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Sect. 2 reviews related work
       and Sect. 3 defines the problem of joint scheduling QCs and SA-AGVs and for-
       mulates it as a MILP model. In Sect. 4, we describe the proposed bi-objective mp-
       BRKGA solution approach and in Sect. 5, we report the numerical experiments and
                                                1 3          

===== PAGE 4 =====
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       244                             D. B. M. M. Fontes, S. M. Homayouni
                                                             
       corresponding computational results. Finally, Sect. 6 provides some conclusions and
       future research directions.                           
                                                             
       2 Related works                                       
                                                             
       Seaside operations planning problems are commonly addressed in isolation, particu-
       larly by practitioners. However, due to the inter-dependencies of, at least some of,
       these problems, achieving the best performance in each problem does not ensure
       the best performance of the port or even a good one. For example, a QC (say QC1)
       may have to wait for an AGV to be able to load/unload a container. This delay of
       QC1 leads to delays on other containers handled by QC1, which in turn may impose
       waiting times (delays) on the vehicles transporting the delayed containers. The
       shortcomings of considering the problems separately have been discussed in the
       literature (see, e.g.,Homayouni and Fontes 2018; Dragović et al. 2017; Carlo et al.
       2015). Problem integration can improve the performance of the container handling
       systems, although requiring the development of complex models that are difficult to
       solve. Homayouni et al. (2014) have shown that similar performance metrics can be
       obtained with a half-sized AGV fleet by scheduling QCs and AGVs jointly rather
       than sequentially.                                    
         Among the reach literature on scheduling container handling systems, we are
       interested in the joint scheduling of QCs and vehicles1, which, in recent years, has
       been increasingly attracting research attention.      
         Mathematical programming models for joint scheduling QCs and AGVs have
       been proposed both for the single-cycling strategy (Hop et al. 2021; Skaf et al. 2021;
       Zhen et al. 2019; Jonker et al. 2019; Kaveshgar and Huynh 2015) and for the dual-
       cycling strategy (Homayouni and Fontes 2021a; Yue et al. 2021, 2020; Zhao et al.
       2019; Homayouni and Tang 2016; Tang et al. 2014; Homayouni and Tang 2013).
         The problem of joint scheduling QCs and AGVs under a single-cycling strategy
       has been proven to be strongly NP-hard (Zhen et al. 2019). Unsurprisingly, several
       metaheuristic approaches have been proposed over the years; the most common
       being genetic algorithms (GAs). Homayouni and Tang (2013) propose a heuristic
       approach in which a GA optimizes the schedule of the QCs handling tasks and then
       a nearest available vehicle heuristic assigns the AGVs to the corresponding transport
       tasks. Kaveshgar and Huynh (2015) propose a GA coupled with a greedy heuristic
       that simultaneously schedules QCs and AGVs. The initial population is randomly
       generated, except for one solution that is obtained by a greedy heuristic.
         Recently, Yue et al. (2021) propose a two-stage approach for the sequential
       scheduling of QCs and AGVs. QCs are scheduled with the objective of maximizing
       customer satisfaction, while AGVs are scheduled with two objectives, namely: mini-
       mizing idle time and minimizing QC delay. For the first stage, the author developed
       1 In this section, for the sake of simplicity and readability, the horizontal transport vehicles are all
       referred to as AGVs. Although some of the works reviewed consider other types of vehicles, e.g., yard
       trucks, the optimization problems being addressed are the same.
       1 3                                                   
                                                             

===== PAGE 5 =====
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       A bi‑objective multi‑population biased random key genetic… 245
                                                             
       a MILP model, which is solved using Gurobi®. To solve the AGVs scheduling prob-
       lem associated with the QCs schedule found in the first phase, the authors propose a
       non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm.              
         Other metaheuristics have also been proposed; for example, Tang et al. (2014)
       propose a particle swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm coupled with a heuristic for
       the joint scheduling of QCs and AGVs. The PSO is responsible for assigning and
       sequencing the handling tasks. The heuristic considers one transport task at a time,
       according to the task request time, and assigns it to the earliest available AGV. Simi-
       lar PSO algorithms were proposed by Zhen et al. (2019) and by Hop et al. (2021).
       Other examples are the two-stage Tabu search (TS) by Zhao et al. (2019), the sim-
       ulated annealing algorithms by Jonker et al. (2019) and by Homayouni and Tang
       (2016), and the enumerative algorithm by Skaf et al. (2021).
         Until recently, port authorities were just concerned with efficiency measures,
       mainly related to time, such as loading and unloading makespan (Hop et al. 2021;
       Skaf et al. 2021; Jonker et al. 2019; Kaveshgar and Huynh 2015), idle and waiting
       times (Yue et al. 2021; Zhen et al. 2019; Tang et al. 2014), and equipment utiliza-
       tion and delays (Homayouni and Tang 2013; Homayouni et al. 2014; Homayouni
       and Tang 2016). However, recently, energy efficiency and energy consumption have
       become the main issues when scheduling port operations. This change occurred not
       only due to a more environmentally aware society but also due to changes in regula-
       tion and legislation that enforce a reduction in energy consumption and on pollut-
       ants emissions. This paradigm shift implies new management practices and policies,
       which have become the focus of recent research. The next step, which is already
       being made, is to approach operational decisions in a way that ensures the outcomes
       required by these new management practices and policies.
         As recent surveys on energy-efficient practices in seaports show there is a very
       limited number of works on operations planning addressing energy issues (Sdouko-
       poulos et al. 2019; Iris and Lam 2019). Zhao et al. (2019) propose a two-stage TS
       algorithm to find solutions for the joint scheduling of QCs and AGVs. However,
       in their approach QCs and AGVs are scheduled sequentially rather than simultane-
       ously. The first stage uses a TS to schedule QCs and the second stage dispatches
       AGVs based on the QC schedule previously obtained. Since both stages minimize
       the energy consumed by the scheduled resources, there is a single objective func-
       tion and thus, no trade-off solutions need to be searched for. Another sequential
       approach for scheduling QCs and AGVs is proposed by Yue et al. (2020). First, a
       constrained partial enumeration strategy schedules the QCs in order to minimize
       energy consumption. Then a GA is used to assign the containers to AGVs and to
       find the sequence of containers for each AGV such that no QC is delayed. In this
       problem, the objective is to minimize the AGV energy consumption. Again, no
       trade-off solutions need to be searched for as just one objective is considered. These
       works address energy consumption in seaports; however, its minimization is not bal-
       anced with other objectives. Furthermore, they assume the AGVs to move at a sin-
       gle constant speed.                                   
         Current AGV technology allows speed control and adjustment. Therefore, AGVs
       traveling speed can be increased or decreased. Usually, traveling at a lower speed
       requires a lower power demand and thus a lower energy consumption. On the other
                                                1 3          

===== PAGE 6 =====
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       246                             D. B. M. M. Fontes, S. M. Homayouni
                                                             
       hand, lowering the traveling speed increases the traveling time. Therefore, speed
       management requires balancing energy consumption and execution time. By adjust-
       ing the traveling speed of some AGVs one may reduce their energy consumption
       without impacting productivity or may increase productivity without impacting
       energy consumption. For example, an AGV arriving at the quayside to pick up or
       drop off a container ahead of time, i.e., before the QC is ready to load or unload
       the container, can be slowed down. This way reducing energy consumption without
       impacting container handling times. On the other hand, speeding up an AGV may
       reduce a QC idle time (waiting for the AGV), which in turn anticipates container
       handling which may impact the makespan.               
         Speed adjustable AGVs (SA-AGVs) have been around for sometime and have
       already been considered in other contexts, e.g., in the pollution routing problem (a
       variant of the vehicle routing problem that includes determining the speed of the
       vehicles on each route segment) (Bektaş and Laporte 2011; Ronen 2011). Never-
       theless, thus far, just one work has considered the joint scheduling of QCs and SA-
       AGVs (Homayouni and Fontes 2021a). In it, three bi-objective MILP models are
       proposed to simultaneously schedule QCs and SA-AGVs. Two of the models use a
       single cycling strategy since they consider either the unloading of a set of importing
       containers or the loading of a set of exporting containers. The third model resorts to
       a dual-cycling strategy to unload and to load a mixed set of importing and exporting
       containers. All three models minimize both the makespan and the total energy con-
       sumed by the SA-AGVs.                                 
         In here, we extend and improve on the work in (Homayouni and Fontes 2021a)
       since i) the MILP model proposed requires fewer variables and fewer constraints and
       ii) we also propose an mp-BRKGA that is capable of addressing larger and realistic
       size instances. Furthermore, the mp-BRKGA approximates well the Pareto front and
       thus, finds good trade-off solutions efficiently. Moreover, through the computational
       results, we provide empirical evidence of the advantages of considering SA-AGVs
       in practice, since by using them it is possible to improve both port productivity
       (makespan) and port energy efficiency (energy consumption).
       3 P roblem definition & formulation                   
                                                             
       Container ships arrive at ports and, based on ships characteristics and cargoes char-
       acteristics, port authorities determine where they should berth as well as which QCs
       are assigned to each ship. The order in which containers must be handled as well as
       which QC handles each container are also predetermined. Therefore, the problem of
       joint scheduling QCs and speed adjustable AGVs requires solving simultaneously
       four interdependent combinatorial optimization problems, namely: QC scheduling
       - determining the starting and the ending time of each handling task for each QC;
       AGV assignment - determining which vehicle performs each transport task; AGV
       scheduling - determining the sequence and the starting and the ending time of each
       transport task for each vehicle; and AGV mode - determining the traveling speed of
       each segment of each transport task.                  
       1 3                                                   
                                                             

===== PAGE 7 =====
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       A bi‑objective multi‑population biased random key genetic… 247
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
         All exporting containers are initially stored at the LU stations. Each exporting
       container is picked up by an SA-AGV from the specified LU station and transported
       to the respective quayside. Once the SA-AGV arrives at the quayside and the cor-
       responding QC is available, the QC picks up the container from the SA-AGV, releas-
       ing the SA-AGV. Then, the QC moves the container onto the ship, places it in a
       predetermined holding space, and moves back empty to the quayside. Thus, the han-
       dling time of a QC in loading tasks is the time elapsed since it picks up the container
       from the SA-AGV (when both are available at the quayside) until the QC is back
       to the quayside, ready for its next assignment. Similarly, all importing containers
       are initially available on the ships. The handling of an importing container requires
       the QC to move empty from the quayside to the holding area in the ship where the
       container is located, to grab and move the container to the quayside, and to drop it
       off onto the assigned SA-AGV. Once the QC reaches the quayside with the container
       and the SA-AGV is available (at the quayside), the QC drops the container onto the
       SA-AGV and becomes ready to start its next task. Then, the SA-AGV transports the
       container to the storage yard and delivers it to the predetermined LU station. The
       handling time of a QC in unloading tasks is the time elapsed since it moves empty
       from the quayside until it drops off the container onto the SA-AGV. Transfer times
       between QCs and SA-AGVs and between SA-AGVs and LU stations are assumed
       negligible.                                           
         A schematic view of the work process of SA-AGVs and QCs is illustrated in
       Fig. 1. Recall that under the dual-cycling strategy the SA-AGVs can be assigned to
       any sequence of loading and/or unloading tasks.       
         A transport task requires an SA-AGV to carry the corresponding container from its
       origin to its destination. However, the SA-AGV location (dwell point) and the container
       location may not be the same. Hence, a transport task may require the SA-AGV to
       travel empty from its dwell point to the location where the container needs to be picked
                                                1 3          
                                         elciheV             
                         A loading task                      
                                     LU sta on               
                         An unloading task                   
               QCs                      Storage yard         
       Fig. 1 A schematic view of the work process: loading and an unloading tasks under dual-cycling strategy

===== PAGE 8 =====
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       248                             D. B. M. M. Fontes, S. M. Homayouni
                                                             
       up at (empty leg) as well as a loaded travel from the current location of the container
       to the location it must be dropped off (loaded leg). SA-AGVs can autonomously adjust
       their speed for each leg of each transport task. Since we assume that all containers carry
       approximately the same cargo, SA-AGVs power consumption depends on whether the
       SA-AGV travels empty or loaded and on its traveling speed. Furthermore, as the floor
       layout is known, empty and loaded travel times, between every origin-destination pair,
       at each speed are predetermined.                      
         At the beginning of the scheduling period the location of all SA-AGVs is given and,
       while operating, SA-AGVs remain wherever they finish the transport task (dwell point)
       until they start the next one. Any of the SA-AGVs can be used to transport any con-
       tainer. QCs and SA-AGVs can perform one task at a time in a non-preemptive manner.
         We seek to find the starting/ending time of each handling task for each QC and the
       starting/ending time of each transport task for each SA-AGV as well as the traveling
       speed for the loaded and the empty legs of each transport task such that all importing
       containers are unloaded and stored at the corresponding LU stations and all exporting
       containers are loaded to the assigned holding space at the ships.
         Among all possible solutions we are interested in those that minimize the makespan
       and the total SA-AVGs energy consumption.             
         The MILP model that we propose is a modified and improved version of the one
       proposed in (Homayouni and Fontes 2021a) as it requires fewer variables and fewer
       constraints. The notation used is provided in Table 1.
         Without loss of generality, let us consider that tasks 1 to n 1 are the ordered
       tasks associated with the containers assigned to the first QC (Q C 1 ), tasks n 1 + 1
       to n 1 + n 2 are the ordered tasks associated with the containers assigned to QC 2 ,
                    L   U                                    
       and so on. Further, let and be the sets of loading and unloading tasks, respec-
       tively, with J = L ∪ U . Additionally, we define a set F of pairs of tasks that cannot
       be transported consecutively, which is used to exclude variables and constraints;
       this way reducing the size of the model. This set contains pairs of non-existing
       or non-feasible consecutive tasks, namely: pairs of tasks including the same task
       twice and pairs of tasks of the same QC that do not satisfy precedence constraints.
       F = {(i, i), i ∈ J} ∪ {(i, j) ∶j ≤ i, with i, j ∈ J k and k ∈ K} , where J k is the set of n k
       ordered tasks handled by QC k and J is the set of all handling tasks.
                         Minimize Z = C                      
                               1  max                        
                               Z = E                (1)      
                               2                             
                         Subject to:                         
                         C  ≥ c , ∀j ∈ L,           (2)      
                         max  j                              
                         C  ≥ r , ∀j ∈ U,                    
                          max j                     (3)      
            E =        xv 𝜃vev + 𝜒v𝜗v𝜀v + yv 𝜃v ev ,         
                       ij ij    j j        aj aj    (4)      
               j∈J ( i∈J v∈V v∈V      a∈A v∈V  )             
               ∑  ∑ ∑ (   ) ∑ (    )  ∑ ∑ (   )              
       1 3                                                   

===== PAGE 9 =====
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       A bi‑objective multi‑population biased random key genetic… 249
       Table 1 Notation: Sets, indices, parameters, and variables
                                                             
       Sets:                                                 
       L       Set of loading tasks, indexed by i and j;     
       U       Set of unloading tasks, indexed by i and j;   
       J       Set of all tasks J = L ∪ U with N = J , indexed by i and j;
       K       Set of QCs, indexed by k;                     
       J k     Set of the n k ordered tasks allocated t | o |QC k , k ∈ K;
       A       Set of SA-AGVs, indexed by a;                 
       V       Set of speed values at which the SA-AGVs can travel, indexed by v, 𝜔;
       F       Set of pairs of tasks that cannot be transported/handled consecutively.
       Parameters:                                           
       𝜏 j     QC handling time for task j ∈ J;              
       𝜃 i v j Empty travel time to pick up task j ∈ J at speed v ∈ V immediately after delivering
                task i ∈ J;                                  
       𝜃 a v j Empty travel time to pickup task j ∈ J at speed v ∈ V , as the first task of SA-AGV
                a ∈ A;                                       
       𝜗v j    Loaded travel time to deliver task j ∈ J at speed v ∈ V;
       ev      Empty power consumption at speed v ∈ V;       
       𝜀v      Loaded power consumption at speed v ∈ V;      
       M       A sufficiently large positive integer.        
       Decision and auxiliary variables:                     
       x i v j Binary variable set to 1 if the empty travel to pickup task j ∈ J is done at speed v ∈ V
                immediately after delivering task i ∈ J and to 0 otherwise; (Note that x i v j is not
                defined if (i, j) ∈F );                      
       𝜒 j v   Binary variable set to 1 if the loaded travel to deliver task j ∈ J is done at speed v ∈ V
                and to 0 otherwise;                          
       yv aj   Binary variable set to 1 if the first task of SA-AGV a ∈ A is to pickup task j ∈ J at
                speed v ∈ V and to 0 otherwise;              
       w j     Binary “dummy” variable set to 1 if the delivery of task j ∈ J is the last task of an
                SA-AGV and to 0 otherwise;                   
       r j     Delivery time of task j ∈ J;                  
       c j     Handling completion time of task j ∈ J;       
       E       Total energy consumed by the SA-AGVs;         
       C max   Makespan.                                     
                           yv ≤ 1, ∀a ∈ A,                   
                            aj                      (5)      
                       j∈J v∈V                               
                       ∑ ∑                                   
                          w =      yv ,                      
                           j        aj              (6)      
                        j∈J  a∈A j∈J v∈V                     
                        ∑    ∑ ∑ ∑                           
                        xv +   yv = 1, ∀j ∈ J,               
                         ij    aj                   (7)      
                    i∈J v∈V v∈V a∈A                          
                    ∑ ∑    ∑ ∑                               
                                                1 3          

===== PAGE 10 =====
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       250                             D. B. M. M. Fontes, S. M. Homayouni
                                                             
                          xv + w = 1, ∀j ∈ J,                
                           ji j                     (8)      
                      i∈J v∈V                                
                      ∑ ∑                                    
                          𝜒v = 1, ∀j ∈ J,                    
                           j                        (9)      
                        v∈V                                  
                        ∑                                    
                      c ≥ c + 𝜏 , ∀j ∈ J ;k ∈ K,             
                      j  j−1 j    k                (10)      
                        c ≥ r + 𝜏 , ∀j ∈ L,                  
                         j j  j                    (11)      
             r ≥ c − 𝜏 + 𝜃vxv + 𝜗𝜔𝜒𝜔 + M xv − 1 , ∀i, j ∈ L, 
             j  i i    ij ij j j      ij           (12)      
                    v∈V   𝜔∈V     (v∈V   )                   
                    ∑     ∑         ∑                        
             r ≥ 𝜃v yv + 𝜗𝜔𝜒𝜔 + M yv − 1 , ∀j ∈ L;a ∈ A,     
             j    aj aj  j j      aj               (13)      
               v∈V    𝜔∈V     (v∈V   )                       
               ∑      ∑        ∑                             
                 c ≥ r + 𝜃vxv + M xv − 1 , ∀i, j ∈ U,        
                 j  i    ij ij   ij                (14)      
                      v∈V    (v∈V   )                        
                      ∑       ∑                              
                c ≥  𝜃v yv + M yv − 1 , ∀j ∈ U;a ∈ A,        
                 j    aj aj   aj                   (15)      
                   v∈V     (v∈V   )                          
                   ∑        ∑                                
                      r ≥ c + 𝜗v𝜒v, ∀j ∈ U,                  
                       j  j   j j                  (16)      
                           v∈V                               
                           ∑                                 
               c ≥ c − 𝜏 + 𝜃vxv + M xv − 1 , ∀j ∈ U;i ∈ L,   
               j  i  i   ij ij   ij                (17)      
                       v∈V    (v∈V  )                        
                      ∑        ∑                             
             r ≥ r + 𝜃vxv + 𝜗𝜔𝜒𝜔 + M xv − 1 , ∀j ∈ L;i ∈ U,  
             j  i   ij ij  j j      ij             (18)      
                  v∈V   𝜔∈V     (v∈V  )                      
                  ∑     ∑        ∑                           
                 xv , 𝜒v, yv , w ∈ {0, 1}, ∀i, j ∈ J;v ∈ V;a ∈ A,
                  ij j aj j                        (19)      
                       C , c , r , E ≥ 0, ∀j ∈ J.            
                        max j j                    (20)      
       Expression (1) states the problem objectives, which are the minimization of the
       makespan and the minimization of the total energy consumed by the SA-AGVs. The
       1 3                                                   

===== PAGE 11 =====
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       A bi‑objective multi‑population biased random key genetic… 251
                                                             
       makespan is defined by constraints (2) and (3) and the total energy consumption by
       constraint (4).                                       
         Constraints (5) and (6) ensure that each SA-AGV has at most one first task and
       that the number of first and last tasks are the same, respectively. Constraints (7) and
       (8) ensure, respectively, that each task is either the first task of an SA-AGV or it is
       preceded by another task and it is either the last task of an SA-AGV or it is followed
       by another task. In addition, constraints (9) ensure that every transport task is per-
       formed at a single chosen speed.                      
         A handling task can only be completed once the assigned QC has completed its
       previous task and the task handling time has elapsed (constraints (10)). Additionally,
       completion time constraints interconnecting the handling tasks (QCs) and the trans-
       port tasks (SA-AGVs) are imposed to ensure feasibility of the schedule for consecu-
       tively transporting two loading tasks (constraints (11) to (13)), two unloading tasks
       (constraints (14) to (16)), and one loading and one unloading tasks (constraints (17)
       and (18)). When loading a task, the QC can only complete its task after the SA-AGV
       arrives at the quayside (with the task) and the handling time has elapsed (constraints
       (11)). On the other hand, an SA-AGV can only deliver the task at the quayside after
       it has completed the previous loading task, traveled empty, at the chosen speed, from
       the quayside to the LU station to pick up the next loading task, and traveled back
       loaded, at the chosen speed, to deliver the task to the quayside (constraints (12). If
       a delivery is the first task of an SA-AGV, then the arrival time at the quayside is
       given as in constraints (13), as there is no previous task delivery. If the two con-
       secutive transport tasks refer to unloading tasks, the task can only be unloaded (from
       the ship onto the SA-AGV) once the SA-AGV has finished its previous delivery (to
       the LU station) and traveled back empty, at the chosen speed, to the quayside (con-
       straints (14)); unless it is the first AGV task, in which case only the empty travel to
       the quayside, at the chosen speed, needs to be accounted for (constraints (15)), as
       there is no previous task delivery. The time at which the task reaches the LU station
       is given by the time at which it is unloaded onto the SA-AGV (handling time) plus
       the loaded travel time to the LU station (constraints (16)). Similarly, constraints (17)
       and (18) ensure the correctness of the completion time and the AGV arrival time for
       mixed loading and unloading tasks.                    
         Finally, constraints (19) and (20) define the decision variables domain.
       4 The bi‑objective multi‑population BRKGA             
       In this section, we propose a multi-objective multi-population biased random key
       genetic algorithm (mp-BRKGA) that quickly finds effective solutions. The algo-
               Ω + Π                             Ω           
       rithm evolves populations independently and in parallel: each of the popu-
                       Ω                Π                    
       lations considers one of the objectives, while each of the populations considers
                 Ω                                           
       simultaneously all objectives.                        
         Random key genetic algorithms (RKGAs) were originally proposed by Bean
       (1994) specifically for problems involving sequencing. RKGAs represent a solution
       to the optimization problem as a vector of random keys (RKs), real numbers in the
       interval [0, 1], and search the solution space indirectly. This vector is then decoded
                                                1 3          

===== PAGE 12 =====
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       252                             D. B. M. M. Fontes, S. M. Homayouni
                                                             
       into a solution to the original problem and its quality (fitness) is calculated. There-
       fore, RKGAs can be used to solve a wide range of problems. BRKGAs differ from
       RKGAs by introducing bias in the recombination process as one of the parents is
       always chosen from a group of elite solutions and, during recombination, the alleles
       of this parent have a higher chance to be passed on. BRKGAs have been success-
       fully used to find good quality solutions to combinatorial optimization problems in
       several application areas (see, e.g.,Gonçalves and Wäscher 2020; Homayouni et al.
       2022; Fontes et al. 2019; Zheng et al. 2015; Roque et al. 2014; Fontes and Gon-
       çalves 2013; Nam and Lee 2013.)                       
         The proposed mp-BRKGA borrows the principles of (Gonçalves and Resende
       2012; Fontes and Gonçalves 2013) and thus it searches the solution space indi-
       rectly and evolves several populations independently and in parallel. In addition, it
       also borrows the ideas of the classical Non-Dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm
       II (NSGA-II) (Deb et al. 2002) to create and rank Pareto fronts. However, unlike
       NSGA-II, the proposed mp-BRKGA always allows offspring solutions and mutant
       solutions to be passed onto the next generation, which promotes diversity (Cha-
       gas et al. 2021). On the other hand, the multiple populations are evolved indepen-
       dently; this way increasing the chances of finding good solutions faster and speed-
       ing up convergence (Zheng et al. 2015; Fontes and Gonçalves 2013; Gonçalves and
       Resende 2012).                                        
       4.1 Evolutionary process                              
                                                             
       The evolutionary strategy is similar for all populations. The initial population is
       randomly generated as the components of the random-key vectors are random real
       numbers uniformly sampled from the interval [0,1]. At each generation, a new popu-
       lation is obtained by joining a set of N e elite solutions, a set of N o offspring solu-
       tions, and a set of N m mutant solutions. At each generation, diversity is introduced
       by generating some new individuals rather than performing gene-by-gene mutation
       with very low probability. These new individuals, the mutants, are randomly gener-
       ated in the same way as the initial solutions were and thus, no genetic material of the
       current population is brought in.                     
             Ω                                               
         For the single objective populations, since they are evolved independently and
       in parallel, the elite solutions are the current generation best N e solutions, which are
       copied to the next generation. Regarding the Π multi-objective populations, the N e
       elite solutions are chosen from a pool of solutions. For each multi-objective popula-
       tion 𝜋 ∈ Π at generation g + 1 the pool consists of the generation g best N e solutions
       of population 𝜋 and of the generation g best N e solutions of each of the Ω single
       objective populations, from which repeated solutions are removed. Thus, the pool
       contains up to                                        
               (Ω + 1) ×N                                    
                      e solutions. Additionally, after a pre-determined number
       of generations ( n ex ), all multi-objective populations contribute with their best N e
       solutions to the pool, from which repeated solutions are removed. Therefore, every
       n ex generations the pool contains up to (Ω + Π) × N e solutions.
         To identify the best multi-objective solutions (to incorporate in the pool of solu-
       tions), we first rank the solutions and then solutions with the same rank are sorted
       1 3                                                   

===== PAGE 13 =====
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       A bi‑objective multi‑population biased random key genetic… 253
                                                             
       according to their contribution to diversity. The ranking procedure (Deb et al. 2002)
       has three main steps which are repeated until all solutions have been ranked: (i)
       identify all non-dominated solutions; (ii) rank the solutions found in (i) with the
       smallest value (initially 1); and (iii) remove the solutions found in (i) and repeat.
       Solution contribution to diversity is measured by calculating its crowding distance
       (the larger the better). The crowding distance of a solution is calculated as the nor-
       malized distance between its two closest neighbor solutions with the same non-
       domination rank. To obtain it, the following procedure is used for each rank and
       each objective function: (i) sort the set of solutions; and ii) calculate the crowding
       distance as given in equation (21). Boundary solutions, which have the lowest and
       highest objective function values, are given an infinite crowding distance value to
       ensure they are always selected. The final crowding distance value of a solution is
       given by the sum of the individual crowding distance values for each objective func-
       tion, that is CD l = Ω 𝜔=1 CD𝜔 l , for all l solutions.
                 ∑            f 𝜔 − f 𝜔                      
                         CD𝜔 = l+1 l−1 ,                     
                           l  f 𝜔 − f 𝜔            (21)      
                              max min                        
       where f 𝜔 and f 𝜔 are the 𝜔th objective function values of solution l two closest
            l+1 l−1                                          
       neighbor solutions and f 𝜔 and f 𝜔 are the 𝜔th objective function values of the
                     max   min                               
       boundary solutions.                                   
         Regardless of the population being evolved, the N o offspring solutions are
       obtained by a biased parameterized uniform crossover that for each gene gives a
       higher probability of being copied from the best parent. We randomly select one par-
       ent from the set of elite solutions and the other from the entire population. Finally,
       N m mutants are randomly generated from the same distribution as the initial popula-
       tion, for all populations.                            
         The evolutionary process, which is depicted in Fig. 2, is repeated for a predeter-
       mined number of generations (G max ). The best solution of each of the Ω populations
       (i.e., 𝜔 1 and 𝜔 2 ), as well as the non-dominated solutions of each of the Π multi-
       objective populations, are joined together. Then, repeated and dominated solutions
       are removed. The remaining solutions are Pareto solutions and provide an approxi-
       mation to the Pareto optimal front.                   
       4.2 Solution encoding and decoding                    
       A solution to the problem is encoded as a four-part vector each of which with N
       elements. As before, N = k∈K n k is the total number of tasks and elements 1 to n 1
       refer to the tasks of QC1, elements n 1 + 1 to n 1 + n 2 to the ones of QC2, and so on,
       where n k is the number of ∑ tasks assigned to QC k ∈ K . Each element of the vector
       is a random key (RK). The first N genes are used to obtain the tasks sequence, the
       second N genes to assign AGVs to tasks ( a j ), the third N genes to determine the
       SA-AGV speed for the empty legs ( v j ), and the last N genes to determine the SA-
       AGV speed for the loaded legs ( w j ). An example of a random encoded solution is
       provided in (Fig. 3a).                                
                                                1 3          

===== PAGE 14 =====
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       254                             D. B. M. M. Fontes, S. M. Homayouni
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Fig. 2 Block diagram of the evolutionary process of the proposed mp-BRKGA
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        (a)                                                  
                                                             
        (b)                                                  
                                                             
        (c)                                                  
       Fig. 3 Solution encoding and decoding for an example with eight containers, two QCs each of which
       associated with four tasks, and two SA-AGVs that can travel at one of the three possible speeds
                                                             
         The decoding (mapping) of the first N genes uses the smallest position value
       rule originally devised in (Bean 1994). Genes are sorted in ascending order, thus
       providing a sequence of tasks, see part (i) of (Fig. 3b). Then, the tasks of each QC
       are sorted in ascending order to ensure precedence constraints, see part (i) of
       (Fig. 3c). The genes in the second part of the chromosome are decoded into one
       of the A SA-AGVs as follows: values in the interval [0, 1 ] are decoded as 1 (the
                                        A                    
       first SA-AGV), values in the interval ( 1 , 2 ] are decoded as 2 (the second SA-
                              A A                            
       AGV), | a | nd so on until values in the interval [ A −1 , 1] tha | t | are decoded as A (the
                              | | | | A                      
       last SA-AGV). This is illustrated in Fig. 3 - pa|rt| (ii). The remaining 2N genes are
       decoded into one of the V speed values as foll|o|ws: values in the interval| [0|, 1 ]
                                                    V        
       are decoded as 1 (the first speed value), values in the interval ( 1 , 2 ] are decoded
                                           V V               
       as 2 (the second speed v | alu | e), and so on until values in the interval [ V −1 , 1] t | ha | t
                                          | | | | V          
                                               | |           
                                               | |           
       1 3                                                   

===== PAGE 15 =====
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       A bi‑objective multi‑population biased random key genetic… 255
                                                             
                                                             
        (a)                                                  
                                                             
        (b)                                                  
                                                             
                                                             
        (c)                                                  
                                                             
        (d)                                                  
       Fig. 4 Offspring generation example using parameterized uniform crossover with p e = 0.7
                                                             
       are decoded as V (the highest speed value). This is illustrated in Fig. 3 - parts
       (iii) and (iv) for the empty and loaded legs, respectively.
                | |                                          
       4.3 Crossover procedure                               
                                                             
       At each generation, a set of N o offspring solutions is generated through a biased
       parameterized uniform crossover. Bias is introduced by always selecting one parent
       from the elite solutions and another from the remaining solutions and by giving a
       larger inheritance probability to the genes of the elite parent.
         Figure 4 illustrates the crossover operator: (a) and (b) show two random-key vec-
       tors with 32 genes each. Let, without loss of generality, (Fig. 4a) refer to the elite
       parent and (Fig. 4b) to the non-elite one. Additionally, let p e = 0.7 be the probabil-
       ity of inheriting the genes from the elite parent. To determine from which parent
       each gene is inherited a random number is generated in the interval [0; 1]; the cor-
       responding mapping vector is shown in (Fig. 4c). Whenever a mapping vector ele-
       ment has a value less than or equal to p e , the offspring inherits the allele of the elite
       parent; otherwise it inherits the allele of the non-elite parent. In this example, the
       offspring inherits nine alleles of the non-elite parent and 23 alleles of the elite par-
       ent; resembling the elite parent the most, see (Fig. 4d).
                                                             
       5 Computational experiments                           
                                                             
       We evaluate the performance of the proposed bi-objective mp-BRKGA and the
       MILP model on the set of 26 small-sized problem instances, DS01 to DS26, pro-
       posed in (Homayouni and Fontes 2021a). In these instances, eight to 16 containers
       are to be handled (loaded and unloaded) by two to six QCs and transported by two
       SA-AGVs, under a dual cycling strategy. Additionally, we design and propose a set
       of 10 medium and large-sized problem instances. Instances in this set are designated
       as DL01 to DL10 and consider 40 to 160 containers that are to be handled by eight
       to 16 QCs and transported by four to eight SA-AGVs. All the data pertaining to
       the 36 problem instances can be downloaded from https://fastmanufacturingproject.
       wordpress.com/problem-instances.                      
                                                1 3          
                                                             

===== PAGE 16 =====
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       256                             D. B. M. M. Fontes, S. M. Homayouni
                                                             
         Following on the work in (Homayouni and Fontes 2021a), the average “nominal"
       speed and power consumption are 6                     
                           ms−1                              
                              and 10 kilo Watt-second (kWs) and 3
                                                   ms−1      
       and 15 kWs, for AGVs traveling empty and carrying a 40 tonnes load, respectively. We
       also consider two other speed values, nominal speed   
                                   ±20%                      
                                      . At the higher speed, empty
       AGVs move at 7.2                                      
                  ms−1                                       
                     and consume 13.2 kWs, while loaded ones move at 3.6
                                                   ms−1      
       and consume 19.8 kWs. Similarly, at the lower speed, the AGVs move at 4.8 and 2.4
       ms−1                                                  
          and consume 7.8 and 11.7 kWs when traveling empty and loaded, respectively.
         The bi-objective mp-BRKGA and the MILP model were implemented in P ython®
       3.8 and the MILP model was solved using G urobi® 9.1. All computational experiments
       were carried out on a 3.20 GHz I ntel® Core™i7-8700 PC with 24 GB RAM.
       5.1 Performance indicators                            
       The quality of the mp-BRKGA solutions and corresponding Pareto fronts (PFs) are
       evaluated by resorting to two common performance indicators (PIs), namely: the modi-
       fied Generational Distance (G D+ ) and the Spread ( Δ ) (Li and Yao 2019; Audet et al.
       2021). The former measures the convergence of the solutions while the latter evaluates
       their diversity (spread and uniformity). The          
                               GD+                           
                                  value is to be minimized, zero being
       the best value as it indicates that the PF found lies on the true Pareto front PF∗ . Simi-
       larly, a small Δ value is preferred as it is associated with a better PF distribution, both
       in terms of spread and uniformity. Again,             
                              Δ =0                           
                                  is the best value since it implies that
       solutions found are equidistantly spaced and cover the
                                     PF∗                     
                                       extremes. These indicators
       are calculated as follows:                            
                   n                                         
                  1                                          
          GD+(PF) =   min d+  ,                              
                  n   j∈PF∗ (i,j)                            
                   i=1 (     )                               
                   ∑     {  }                                
                              2            2                 
          where d+ = max f i − f j, 0 + max f i − f j, 0 and f i and f i
              (i,j)     1 1          2 2       1  2          
                 √                                           
                   (  {     })  (  {     })        (22)      
       are the objective function values of solution i (C max and E, respectively);
                          d + d + n−1 d − d̄                 
                     Δ(PF) = u b i=1 i ,           (23)      
                            d + d + d̄ (n − 1)               
                            u  b ∑                           
                                   �   �                     
                                   �   �                     
       where n is the number of solutions in the PF, d i is the Euclidean distance between
       the objective function values of two consecutive solutions in the PF,
                                             d̄              
                                              is the average 
       Euclidean distance, over all d i distances, and d u and d b are the Euclidean distances
       between the two extreme solutions of the PF and those of the PF∗ , respectively.
         To account for differences in the magnitude of the values of the two objective func-
       tions, we normalize them as follows (Li and Yao 2019):
                        f − f min   f − f min                
                    f N = 1 1 and f N = 2 2 ,                
                    1  f max − f min 2 f max − f min (24)    
                       1   1       2   2                     
       1 3                                                   

===== PAGE 17 =====
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       A bi‑objective multi‑population biased random key genetic… 257
                                                             
       where f 1 min and f 1 max and f 2 min and f 2 max are the extreme values of C max and E, respec-
       tively, that is, these values correspond to the objective function values of optimal
       extreme points.                                       
         An approximated true Pareto front (                 
                            PF∗                              
                               ) is obtained by employing a strategy that
       combines the “lexicographic” and 𝜖-constraint methods. More specifically, since we
       have two objectives we consider two single-objective optimization problems, one
       for each objective function. To obtain the            
                              PF∗                            
                                 we perform the following three main
       steps:                                                
       1. determine the optimal makespan                     
                             C∗                              
                               while ignoring the energy consumption
                              0                              
         and then determine the optimal energy consumption   
                                       E∗(C∗)                
                                           while maintaining 
                                          0                  
         the makespan at its optimal value - this provides one of the boundary solutions
         (Pareto front extreme point);                       
       2. determine the optimal energy consumption           
                                 E∗                          
                                   while ignoring the makespan and
                                  0                          
         then determine the optimal makespan                 
                              C∗(E∗)                         
                                   while maintaining the energy con-
                                 0                           
         sumption at its optimal value - this provides the other boundary solution (Pareto
         front extreme point);                               
       3. solve a series of problems optimizing the makespan 
                                      C∗                     
                                        while imposing an upper
                                       i                     
         bound on the energy consumption ( 𝜖-constraint), starting with the best energy
         consumption associated with the optimal makespan (  
                                         E∗(C∗)              
                                             ) and gradually 
                                           0                 
         decreasing it until it is not larger than the optimal energy consumption
                                                 E∗          
                                                   , and     
                                                  0          
         for each problem determine the optimal energy consumption
                                           E∗(C∗)            
                                               while main-   
                                              i              
         taining the makespan found.                         
       By solving a series of optimization models, we obtain a series of non-dominated
       solutions, which are part of the true Pareto front (Miettinen 2008).
       5.2 Parameters setting                                
       To test the proposed mp-BRKGA algorithm we need to set several control param-
       eters. Following literature recommendations, we decided to set the population size
       to P = 20N , the number of elite solutions passed on to N e = 0.2P , the number of
       mutants introduced to N m = 0.1P , and the crossover probability to p e = 0.7 (see,
       e.g.,Gonçalves and Resende 2012; Fontes and Gonçalves 2013; Homayouni et al.
       2022). The remaining control parameters were set through empirical testing. We
       considered values in the intervals recommended in the literature and test them on a
       subset of five instances (instances DS01, DS05, DS10, DS15, and DS20) considering
       all 180 combinations of the following values: G max = {50, 100, 200, 300, 400, 500} ,
       Π = {1, 2, 4} , Ω = {0, 2} , and n ex = {10, 20, 30, 40, 50} . Due to the stochastic nature
       of metaheuristic algorithms, we solved each of the five instances 10 times for each
       of the 180 combinations.                              
         From the experiments conducted we were able to observe and conclude that
       the bi-objective populations outperform the single-objective ones. In addition,
                                                     Ω       
       incorporating the best solutions of the two single-objective populations (i.e.,
       populations) into the bi-objective populations impacts the performance of the
                                                1 3          

===== PAGE 18 =====
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       258                             D. B. M. M. Fontes, S. M. Homayouni
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Fig. 5 Impact of the number of generations in the Pareto front obtained by the mp-BRKGA, for problem
       instance DS10                                         
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Fig. 6 Impact of the number of populations (single and bi-objective) in the Pareto front obtained by the
       mp-BRKGA, for problem instance DS15                   
                                                             
                                                             
       latter in what regards extreme solutions. Further, the number of multi-objective
              Π                                              
       populations also contributes positively to the PIs, however, the improvement
                    Π                                        
       decreases rapidly as increases. Additionally, it requires significantly more
       computation time. As expected, considering a larger number of generations
       improves the PIs; particularly, the convergence of the PF to the PF∗ . Again, the
       improvement decreases with the number of generations while the computation
       time increases significantly. Regarding the n ex , we noticed that both exchang-
       ing solutions too frequently or too infrequently degrades the algorithm perfor-
       mance. The best performance was obtained by exchanging them at about every 30
       1 3                                                   

===== PAGE 19 =====
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       A bi‑objective multi‑population biased random key genetic… 259
                                                             
       generations. Hence, after analyzing the average values of the performance indica-
       tors, we decided to set: G max = 300, Π =2, Ω = 2 , and n ex = 30.
         Part of these conclusions are illustrated in Figs. 5 and 6. The PFs obtained by
       mp-BRKGA with G max = {50, 100, 200, and 300} and the PF∗ obtained by the
       MILP for instance DS10 are shown in Fig. 5. As it can be seen, the mp-BRKGA
       is capable of obtaining a uniform and widely spread PF with different G max values.
       However, its convergence to the                       
                         PF∗                                 
                            improves meaningfully as the number of gen-
       erations increases from 50 to 100 and to 200 and more modestly when it increases
       to 300.                                               
         The PFs obtained by a single population bi-objective BRKGA and an mp-
       BRKGA with two bi-objective populations and two single-objective populations
       (                                                     
        Π =2, Ω =2                                           
               ) and the                                     
                     PF∗                                     
                       , for instance, DS15 are shown in Fig. 6. The impact of
             Ω                                               
       using the populations in finding solutions near the boundary solutions is clearly
       shown. Moreover, having more multi-objective populations increases significantly
       the convergence of PF to PF∗ .                        
       5.3 Results for the set of small‑sized problem instances
       The small-sized problem instances proposed in (Homayouni and Fontes 2021a) were
       solved by the MILP model using the methodology described in the previous subsec-
       tion in order to find an approximated true Pareto front
                                      PF∗                    
                                        . However, for instances
       DS21, DS22, DS25, and DS26 the MILP was not capable of finding the whole
                                                   PF∗       
       (due to either lack of memory or reaching the 10,000 seconds time limit imposed).
       Nevertheless, it was able to find the optimal extreme solutions. All instances were
       solved using the proposed mp-BRKGA, 10 times each. Table 2 summarizes the
       results by reporting for each problem instance, its characteristics (Q - number of
       QCs and T - number of tasks), the best energy consumption and the best makespan
       obtained by the MILP model (C m ∗ ax and E∗ ) and by the mp-BRKGA (C max and E),
       disregarding the makespan and the energy consumption, respectively. Additionally,
       Table 2 also reports the average percentage deviations ( 𝛿 C and 𝛿 E ) between the val-
       ues of the MILP boundary solutions and those of the mp-BRKGA and the average
       values of the PIs, over the 10 runs. It should be noticed that the objective function
       values in Table 2 have been rounded to the nearest integer and the deviations are
       calculated as: 𝛿 C = C ma C x − ∗ C m ∗ ax × 100 and 𝛿 E = E− E∗ E∗ × 100.
                    max                                      
         As it can be seen from the results reported, out of the 52 boundary solutions (two
       for each problem instance) the mp-BRKGA found 45 of them and for the remaining
       seven boundary solutions it found solutions with deviations ranging from 0.90% to
       2.39%. The average makespan and energy consumption deviations are 0.27% and
       0.13%, respectively. The PFs found by the mp-BRKGA closely lie on the PF∗ s since
       the average                                           
              GD+                                            
                 is 0.0192 (ranging from 0.0079 to 0.0395) and it spreads quite uni-
       formly over most of the whole                         
                        PF∗                                  
                           , including the extreme points, since the average
                                                1 3          

===== PAGE 20 =====
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       260                             D. B. M. M. Fontes, S. M. Homayouni
       Table 2 Computational results: MILP and mp-BRKGA performance for the set of small-sized problem
       instances                                             
                 MILP     mp-BRKGA  GAPs     PIs             
                                                             
       Ins  Q-T  C m ∗ ax E∗ C max E 𝛿 C 𝛿 E GD+  Δ          
       DS01 2-8  351 7475 351  7475 0.00 0.00 0.0178 0.5012  
       DS02 2-8  350 7800 350  7800 0.00 0.00 0.0109 0.4884  
       DS03 2-8  350 8125 350  8125 0.00 0.00 0.0134 0.5646  
       DS04 4-8  318 9263 318  9263 0.00 0.00 0.0183 0.4331  
       DS05 4-8  346 9425 346  9425 0.00 0.00 0.0094 0.6500  
       DS06 4-8  243 7800 243  7800 0.00 0.00 0.0225 0.4410  
       DS07 4-8  339 9425 339  9425 0.00 0.00 0.0079 0.8987  
       DS08 4-8  277 8450 277  8450 0.00 0.00 0.0161 0.3632  
       DS09 4-8  279 8450 279  8450 0.00 0.00 0.0125 0.6601  
       DS10 2-12 504 12513 504 12513 0.00 0.00 0.0204 0.4937 
       DS11 2-12 444 10400 444 10400 0.00 0.00 0.0190 0.5776 
       DS12 2-12 493 11700 493 11700 0.00 0.00 0.0275 0.5958 
       DS13 4-12 450 13000 450 13000 0.00 0.00 0.0139 0.7396 
       DS14 4-12 486 13650 486 13650 0.00 0.00 0.0112 0.6691 
       DS15 4-12 367 11213 367 11213 0.00 0.00 0.0344 0.6470 
       DS16 4-12 453 12675 460 12675 1.52 0.00 0.0083 0.8384 
       DS17 4-12 429 12675 429 12675 0.00 0.00 0.0163 0.5941 
       DS18 4-12 380 11456 380 11456 0.00 0.00 0.0142 0.6678 
       DS19 2-16 636 16900 636 16900 0.00 0.00 0.0395 0.5282 
       DS20 2-16 686 17063 686 17225 0.00 0.95 0.0171 0.8509 
       DS21 4-16 629 18038 629 18200 0.00 0.90 –  –          
       DS22 4-16 536 16494 543 16738 1.29 1.48 –  –          
       DS23 3-12 453 11050 453 11050 0.00 0.00 0.0391 0.6387 
       DS24 3-12 532 14462 542 14463 1.87 0.00 0.0332 0.6690 
       DS25 6-12 520 15600 533 15600 2.39 0.00 –  –          
       DS26 6-12 422 13650 422 13650 0.00 0.00 –  –          
       Mean                         0.27 0.13 0.0192 0.6141  
       Δ is 0.6141 (ranging from 0.3632 to 0.8987)2. In addition, the mp-BRKGA finds
       such PFs very quickly as its computation time ranges from 10 to 65 seconds.
                                                             
                                                             
       5.4 Results for the set of medium and large‑sized problem instances
                                                             
       This section reports the computational results for the set of 10 medium and large-
       sized problem instances. Due to problem complexity, the MILP model could not be
                                                             
       2 Note that GD+ and Δ values were not calculated for instances DS21, DS22, DS25, and DS26 for which
                           PF∗                               
       the MILP model was not capable of finding a .         
       1 3                                                   
                                                             

===== PAGE 21 =====
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       A bi‑objective multi‑population biased random key genetic… 261
       Table 3 Computational results:                        
                                Makespan Energy bound- PIs   
       mp-BRKGA performance for                              
                                boundary ary                 
       the set of medium and large-                          
       sized problem instances Ins Q-T-A C max E C max E PF Δ
                       DL01 8-40-4 1458 101318 4052 80925 |109| 0.8080
                       DL02 8-80-4 3580 211270 6990 169679 48 0.5710
                       DL03 10-50-5 1678 145452 3715 121631 79 0.8124
                       DL04 10-100-5 4663 304850 8416 267287 16 0.5450
                       DL05 12-60-6 2316 241267 5357 198802 60 0.8426
                       DL06 12-120-6 6126 482919 9258 426581 28 0.5618
                       DL07 14-70-7 3231 330260 4678 273490 90 0.9650
                       DL08 14-140-7 7801 684191 11550 605093 26 0.6185
                       DL09 16-80-8 3489 363978 6205 303629 54 0.7536
                       DL10 16-160-8 7845 764904 13331 701853 24 0.7478
                       Mean                     53 0.7226    
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Fig. 7 The Pareto front solutions for large-sized problem instance DL06
                                                             
       solved to optimality (due to either lack of memory or reaching the 10,000 seconds
       time limit imposed); hence, we only report the solutions found by the mp-BRKGA.
         Table 3 reports problem characteristics (Q - number of QCs, T - number of
       tasks, and A - number of SA-AGVs) and the two boundary solutions for each prob-
       lem instance, i.e., the minimum makespan and its associated energy consumption
       (Makespan boundary) and the minimum energy consumption and associated makes-
       pan (Energy boundary). In addition, for each problem instance, Table 3 also reports
       the cardinality of the Pareto front ( PF ) and the diversity of the solutions found ( Δ ).
       Note that, since for these problem instances no reference PFs are available, to cal-
                 Δ                                           
       culate the spread ( ) we used the b|est |boundary solutions obtained by mp-BRKGA.
                                                             
                                                1 3          
                                                             

===== PAGE 22 =====
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       262                             D. B. M. M. Fontes, S. M. Homayouni
       Table 4 MILP Pareto front: 3S      NS                 
       boundary objective function                           
       values and cardinality ( PF∗ ), Ins C m ∗ ax E∗ PF∗ C m ∗ ax E∗ PF∗
       for problem instances DS18 and                        
       DS23      | |   DS18 380 11456 |35 | 458 11750 |7 |   
                       DS23 453 11050 32  524 11333 6        
                                                             
         The results show that the mp-BRKGA is capable of finding well-populated PFs
       (the average number of solutions in the PFs is 53 and ranges between 16 and 109)
       and that the solutions found are diverse and uniformly distributed as the average
       spread is 0.7226 (ranging between 0.5450 and 0.9650). Figure 7 illustrates the PF
       obtained by mp-BRKGA for problem instance DL06. As it can be seen, the energy
       consumption can be decreased substantially without a dramatic increase in the
       makespan and the makespan can be decreased drastically with a small increase in
       the energy consumption. The computation time, as expected, increases. On average,
       it took about 1550 seconds to find the PFs (ranging from 400 and 3650 seconds).
       The computation times, although much larger, are not a major concern since moor-
       ing times are much larger and thus, whenever the ships are ready to be loaded and
       unloaded the solution will be readily available.      
                                                             
       5.5 Impact of considering SA‑AGVs                     
                                                             
       In order to show the positive impacts of considering SA-AGVs rather than AGVs,
       we also solved the problem instances under a scenario in which AGVs can only
       travel at the nominal speed; thus having the two following scenarios:
                                                             
       1. Scenario                                           
               3S                                            
                 - AGVs can travel atone of the three previously defined speeds:
         nominal and nominal                                 
                     ±20%                                    
                         (SA-AGVs);                          
               NS                                            
       2. Scenario - AGVs travel at the nominal speed only.  
       From the results obtained, it is possible to conclude that under scenario
                                              3S             
                                                the Pareto   
       fronts (both of the MILP and of the mp-BRKGA) are wider and have many more
       non-dominated solutions. Regarding the boundary solutions, the minimum makes-
       pan under scenario                                    
                  NS                                         
                     is, on average, about 17.6% larger than that of scenario
                                                    3S       
                               NS                            
       while the minimum energy under scenario is on average 2.5% larger than that of
       scenario                                              
            3S                                               
              . Finally, the average cardinality of the Pareto fronts is 29 (ranging from
       21 to 35) in scenario                                 
                   3S                                        
                     and it drops down to 4 (ranging from 1 to 9) in scenario
       NS                                                    
         . These characteristics are very important since they provide the management
       with additional trade-off solutions and thus, with the flexibility of choosing the solu-
       tion to implement having in mind the status of the Port; sometimes it is important to
       speed up operations while in others the focus is the energy.
         Let us take a closer look at the Pareto fronts obtained under these two scenarios
       by analyzing them, in more detail, for two problem instances (DS18 and DS23).
       Table 4 reports the boundary solutions as well as the cardinality of the
                                                PF∗          
                                                   s and     
       1 3                                                   

===== PAGE 23 =====
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       A bi‑objective multi‑population biased random key genetic… 263
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Fig. 8 Pareto fronts for problem instance DS18 under scenarios 3S and NS (MILP-PF∗ and mp-
       BRKGA-PF)                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Fig. 9 Pareto fronts for problem instance DS23 under scenarios 3S and NS (MILP-PF∗ and mp-
       BRKGA-PF)                                             
       Figs. 8 and 9 depicts the MILP Pareto fronts (        
                                PF∗                          
                                   s) as well as the mp-BRKGA ones
       (PFs).                                                
         Looking at the boundary solutions, it can be seen that under scenario
                                                 3S          
                                                   both      
       the minimum makespan and the minimum energy are lower (about 20% and 2.5%,
                                NS                           
       respectively) than those of under scenario . Additionally, the number of solu-
       tions made available to management, i.e., non-dominated solutions, in scenario
                                                    3S       
       is much larger (35 and 32 instead of 7 and 6 for instances DS18 and DS23, respec-
       tively); thus, increasing management flexibility and ability to adjust the operations
       schedule to port conditions and/or customer preferences.
                                                1 3          

===== PAGE 24 =====
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       264                             D. B. M. M. Fontes, S. M. Homayouni
                                                             
         Figures 8 and 9 show that both the PFs and the PF∗ s obtained under scenario 3S
       are wider and consist of many more trade-off solutions (see also Table 4). Look-
       ing at the solutions with intermediate values both regarding makespan and energy
       consumption, it can be seen that by using SA-AGVs (scenario
                                          3S                 
                                            ) it is possible to
       significantly reduce either the makespan or the energy consumption or even both.
       For example, consider the solutions labelled 2 (scenario
                                       NS                    
                                         ) and 3 (scenario   
                                                   3S        
                                                     )       
       in Fig. 8. The energy consumption in both solutions is almost the same, but the
                                    NS                       
       makespan of the solution obtained under scenario (labelled 2) is about 35.6%
       larger. Other examples are shown in Fig. 9, solutions labelled 1 (scenario
                                                3S           
                                                  ) and 4    
             NS                                              
       (scenario ) have similar makespan values, however, the solution obtained under
            NS                                               
       scenario (labelled 4) requires about 10.6% more energy; solutions 2 (scenario
       3S                                                    
         ) and 4 (scenario                                   
                   NS                                        
                     ) require almost the same amount of energy, however, the
                                 NS                          
       makespan is about 11.7% larger under scenario .       
         Another interesting observation is that for a specific level of one of the objectives,
       the use of SA-AGVs allows a significant improvement in the other objective with a
       minor deterioration of the former. Regarding the problem instance, DS18, see Fig. 8,
       for energy levels ranging 11,700 - 12,000 kWs (2.5% interval) using the SA-AGVs
       one can decrease the makespan to about 50% of the original value. For example,
       from solution 1 to solution 3 the energy consumption goes up from 11,694 to 11,752
       kWs (an increase of less than 0.5%), while the makespan goes down from 938 sec-
       onds to 664 seconds (a decrease of more than 29%). Similar observations can be
       done when comparing other alternative solutions, although sometimes with smaller
       magnitudes. For example, solutions labeled 2 and 3 in Fig. 9 have a similar makes-
       pan (it goes up from 465 to 470, about 1%), but quite different energy consumption
       (it goes down from 13,370 to 12,690, about 5%).       
         For further analysis, in Fig. 10 we provide the Gantt charts of solutions labeled 1,
       2, and 4 of problem instance DS23. Each Gantt chart depicts the routing of each SA-
       AGV, the speed at which the SA-AGVs travel (lower, nominal, and higher) in each
       leg of each journey, the time at which the SA-AGVs start and finish each journey
       leg, and the QCs tasks timing. Empty and loaded journey legs are also shown as the
       latter are represented using thicker lines.           
         By comparing the Gantt charts of solutions labeled 1 and 4 we can see how to
       take advantage of the adjustable speed in order to reduce the number of empty legs
       and thus decrease the energy required to perform all transport tasks while maintain-
       ing the makespan. Similarly, the comparison of the Gantt charts of solutions labeled
       2 and 4 shows how to take advantage of the adjustable speed in order to decrease the
       makespan while having a similar energy consumption, actually slightly lower.
       6 Conclusion                                          
       In this work, we consider the joint scheduling of QCs and speed adjustable AGVs
       in container terminals through which, at almost no extra operational cost, we can
       decrease the energy consumption and/or service time (makespan). The problem is
       formulated as a bi-objective Mixed-Integer Linear Programming (MILP) model,
       which is solved by employing a strategy that combines the “lexicographic" and 𝜖
       1 3                                                   

===== PAGE 25 =====
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       A bi‑objective multi‑population biased random key genetic… 265
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Fig. 10 The Gantt chart for Pareto solutions of problem instance D23 (solutions 1 and 2 refer to scenario
       3S          NS                                        
         and solution 4 refers to ); The loaded leg of each travel assignment is indicated by a thicker line
       -constraint methods in order to obtain an approximated true Pareto front (
                                                   PF∗       
                                                     ).      
       Since several optimization problems have to be solved, each requiring a significant
       computation time, we also propose bi-objective multi-population BRKGA.
         Our computational experiments show the effectiveness of the proposed MILP
       model and solution strategy since it is capable of finding
                                       PF∗                   
                                         for 22 of the 26 small-
       sized problem instances considered. The mp-BRKGA is capable of finding 45 out
       of 52 boundary solutions and for the remaining seven boundary solutions it found
       solutions with average deviations of 0.27% and 0.13% from the minimum makespan
       and energy consumption values, respectively. Additionally, the mp-BRKGA finds
       approximated Pareto fronts (PF) that closely lie on the PF∗ . The non-dominated
       solutions it found are uniformly distributed and cover, almost always, the whole
                                                   PF∗       
                                                1 3          

===== PAGE 26 =====
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       266                             D. B. M. M. Fontes, S. M. Homayouni
                                                             
       . Regarding medium and large-sized instances, the mp-BRKGA found PFs with up
       to 109 solutions. Additionally, the solutions found are diverse and uniformly distrib-
       uted, since the average spread is only 0.7226.        
         The advantage of considering speed adjustable AGVs is clearly demonstrated.
       On the one hand, the boundary solutions have much smaller makespan and energy
       values. On the other hand, we have also shown that by adjusting the speed one can
       reduce the makespan, the energy consumed, and even both simultaneously. Finally,
       considering speed adjustable AGVs increases management flexibility since a wider
       range of trade-off solutions can be found. Port management can choose the solution
       to implement (QCs and AGVs schedules) that best fits port conditions or customer
       requirements without having to solve the problem again and with full knowledge of
       the implications.                                     
         This work can be extended in several ways; for example, by including other con-
       tainer operations (e.g., QCs planning problem and storage yard crane scheduling)
       within the scheduling process, by considering other port resources and equipment
       (e.g., human resources and buffer spaces), by including other scheduling subprob-
       lems (e.g., collision avoidance, deadlock resolution, congestion management, and
       layout planning), and by including other energy factors (e.g., energy consumption by
       other resources and energy price variations).         
       Declarations                                          
       Conflict of interests The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       References                                            
                                                             
       Audet C, Bigeon J, Cartier D, Le Digabel S, Salomon L (2021) Performance indicators in multiobjec-
         tive optimization. Eur J Oper Res 292(2):397–422    
       Bean JC (1994) Genetic algorithms and random keys for sequencing and optimization. ORSA J Com-
         put 6(2):154–160                                    
       Bektaş T, Laporte G (2011) The pollution-routing problem. Trans Res Part B: Methodol
         45(8):1232–1250                                     
       Carlo HJ, Vis IFA, Roodbergen KJ (2015) Seaside operations in container terminals: literature over-
         view, trends, and research directions. Flex Serv Manuf J 27(2):224–262
       Chagas JB, Blank J, Wagner M, Souza MJ, Deb K (2021) A non-dominated sorting based custom-
         ized random-key genetic algorithm for the bi-objective traveling thief problem. J Heuristics
         27(3):267–301                                       
       Deb K, Pratap A, Agarwal S, Meyarivan T (2002) A fast and elitist multiobjective genetic algorithm:
         NSGA-II. IEEE Trans Evol Comput 6(2):182–197        
       Dragović B, Tzannatos E, Park NK (2017) Simulation modelling in ports and container terminals:
         literature overview and analysis by research field, application area and tool. Flex Serv Manuf J
         29(1):4–34                                          
       Dulebenets MA, Pasha J, Abioye OF, Kavoosi M (2021) Vessel scheduling in liner shipping: a critical
         literature review and future research needs. Flex Serv Manuf J 33(1):43–106
       Fontes DBMM, Gonçalves JF (2013) A multi-population hybrid biased random key genetic algorithm
         for hop-constrained trees in nonlinear cost flow networks. Optim Lett 7(6):1303–1324
       1 3                                                   

===== PAGE 27 =====
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       A bi‑objective multi‑population biased random key genetic… 267
                                                             
       Fontes DBMM, Pereira PA, Fontes ACC (2019) A decision support system for TV self-promotion
         scheduling. Int J Adv Trends Comput Sci Eng 8(2):134–140
       Gonçalves JF, Resende MG (2012) A parallel multi-population biased random-key genetic algorithm
         for a container loading problem. Comput Oper Res 39(2):179–190
       Gonçalves JF, Wäscher G (2020) A MIP model and a biased random-key genetic algorithm based
         approach for a two-dimensional cutting problem with defects. Eur J Oper Res 286(3):867–882
       Homayouni SM, Fontes DBMM (2018) Metaheuristics for maritime operations. Wiley Online Library,
         IAU, Iran                                           
       Homayouni SM, Fontes DBMM (2021) Energy-efficient scheduling of intra-terminal container trans-
         port. In: Intelligent control and smart energy management. Renewable Resources and Transpor-
         tation, Springer International Publishing, Cham     
       Homayouni SM, Fontes DBMM (2021b) A MILP model for energy-efficient job shop scheduling
         problem and transport resources. In: IFIP International Conference on Advances in Production
         Management Systems, Springer, pp 378–386            
       Homayouni SM, Tang SH (2013) Multi objective optimization of coordinated scheduling of cranes
         and vehicles at container terminals. Math Probl Eng 2013:746781
       Homayouni SM, Tang SH (2016) Optimization of integrated scheduling of handling and storage oper-
         ations at automated container terminals. WMU J Marit Aff 15(1):17–39
       Homayouni SM, Tang SH, Motlagh O (2014) A genetic algorithm for optimization of integrated
         scheduling of cranes, vehicles, and storage platforms at automated container terminals. J Comput
         Appl Math 270:545–556                               
       Homayouni SM, Fontes DBMM, Gonçalves JF (2022) A multistart biased random key genetic algo-
         rithm for the flexible job shop scheduling problem with transportation. Int Trans Oper Res.
         https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 111/i tor.1 2878            
       Hop DC, Van Hop N, Anh TTM (2021) Adaptive particle swarm optimization for integrated quay
         crane and yard truck scheduling problem. Comput Ind Eng 153:107075
       Iris Ç, Lam JSL (2019) A review of energy efficiency in ports: operational strategies, technologies and
         energy management systems. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 112:170–182
       Jonker T, Duinkerken MB, Yorke-Smith N, de Waal A, Negenborn RR (2019) Coordinated optimiza-
         tion of equipment operations in a container terminal. Flex Serv Manuf J 33:281–311
       Kaveshgar N, Huynh N (2015) Integrated quay crane and yard truck scheduling for unloading inbound
         containers. Int J Prod Econ 159:168–177             
       Kizilay D, Eliiyi DT et al (2021) A comprehensive review of quay crane scheduling, yard operations
         and integrations thereof in container terminals. Flex Serv Manuf J 33:1–42
       Li M, Yao X (2019) Quality evaluation of solution sets in multiobjective optimisation: a survey. ACM
         Comput Surv (CSUR) 52(2):1–38                       
       Ma N, Zhou C, Stephen A (2021) Simulation model and performance evaluation of battery-powered
         AGV systems in automated container terminals. Simul Model Pract Theory 106:102146
       Miettinen K (2008) Introduction to multiobjective optimization: noninteractive approaches. Springer,
         Berlin, Heidelberg, pp 1–26                         
       Nam H, Lee T (2013) A scheduling problem for a novel container transport system: a case of mobile
         harbor operation schedule. Flex Serv Manuf J 25(4):576–608
       Riazi S, Bengtsson K, Lennartson B (2020) Energy optimization of large-scale AGV systems. IEEE
         Trans Autom Sci Eng 18(2):638–49                    
       Ronen D (2011) The effect of oil price on containership speed and fleet size. J Oper Res Soc
         62(1):211–216                                       
       Roque LAC, Fontes DBMM, Fontes FACC (2014) A hybrid biased random key genetic algorithm
         approach for the unit commitment problem. J Comb Optim 28(1):140–166
       Schmidt J, Meyer-Barlag C, Eisel M, Kolbe LM, Appelrath HJ (2015) Using battery-electric AGVS in
         container terminals-assessing the potential and optimizing the economic viability. Res Trans Bus
         Manag 17:99–111                                     
       Sdoukopoulos E, Boile M, Tromaras A, Anastasiadis N (2019) Energy efficiency in European ports:
         state-of-practice and insights on the way forward. Sustainability 11(18):4952
       Skaf A, Lamrous S, Hammoudan Z, Manier MA (2021) Integrated quay crane and yard truck schedul-
         ing problem at port of Tripoli-Lebanon. Comput Ind Eng 159:107448
       Tang L, Zhao J, Liu J (2014) Modeling and solution of the joint quay crane and truck scheduling prob-
         lem. Eur J Oper Res 236(3):978–990                  
                                                1 3          

===== PAGE 28 =====
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       268                             D. B. M. M. Fontes, S. M. Homayouni
                                                             
       Yu B, Peng Z, Tian Z, Yao B (2019) Sailing speed optimization for tramp ships with fuzzy time win-
         dow. Flex Serv Manuf J 31(2):308–330                
       Yue L, Fan H, Zhai C (2020) Joint configuration and scheduling optimization of a dual-trolley
         quay crane and automatic guided vehicles with consideration of vessel stability. Sustainability
         12(1):24                                            
       Yue L, Fan H, Ma M (2021) Optimizing configuration and scheduling of double 40 ft dual-trolley
         quay cranes and AGVS for improving container terminal services. J Clean Prod 292:126019
       Zhao Q, Ji S, Guo D, Du X, Wang H (2019) Research on cooperative scheduling of automated quay-
         side cranes and automatic guided vehicles in automated container terminal. Math Probl Eng
         2019:6574582                                        
       Zhen L, Yu S, Wang S, Sun Z (2019) Scheduling quay cranes and yard trucks for unloading operations
         in container ports. Ann Oper Res 273(1):455–478     
       Zheng JN, Chien CF, Gen M (2015) Multi-objective multi-population biased random-key genetic
         algorithm for the 3-d container loading problem. Comput Ind Eng 89:80–87
       Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
       and institutional affiliations.                       
       Springer Nature or its licensor holds exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with the
       author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article
       is solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law.
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       1 3                                                   
                                                             